Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
exercise and altitude physiology. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin with exercise. What happens to oxygen uptake during exercise,
and what is meant by maximal oxygen uptake?
Exercise is a stress that may increase the body's oxygen consumption many-fold,
and the integrated cardiovascular and respiratory response exists to meet that
demand.
Oxygen uptake, the rate at which the body consumes oxygen,
rises in proportion to the work performed up to a point.
The maximal oxygen uptake, or VO2max,
is the highest rate of oxygen consumption attainable,
beyond which further work does not increase it because the limit of oxygen delivery
and utilisation has been reached; it is the single best measure of aerobic fitness,
around forty millilitres per kilogram per minute in a healthy young adult and much
higher in elite athletes.
VO2 is described by the Fick principle:
oxygen consumption equals cardiac output multiplied by the difference in oxygen
content between arterial and mixed venous blood.
So increasing oxygen uptake during exercise requires increasing cardiac output,
increasing the extraction of oxygen by the tissues, or both,
and the maximum is set by whichever of delivery — chiefly the maximal cardiac
output — or peripheral utilisation is limiting;
in most healthy people it is cardiac output that limits VO2max.
The rise in VO2 at the start of exercise is not instantaneous,
so there is an initial oxygen deficit met anaerobically.
So oxygen uptake rises with work to a ceiling, VO2max,
set largely by maximal oxygen delivery,
and the Fick principle frames the whole response as the product of output and
extraction.
Describe the cardiac output response to exercise.
Cardiac output, the product of heart rate and stroke volume,
can rise four- to six-fold during exercise,
from around five litres per minute at rest to twenty-five or more in a fit adult,
and this rise is the chief means of increasing oxygen delivery.
Heart rate increases progressively and roughly linearly with workload,
from withdrawal of vagal tone at first and then increasing sympathetic drive,
up to the age-predicted maximum of about two hundred and twenty minus age,
at which point it can rise no further.
Stroke volume increases too, though less dramatically:
it rises early in exercise through increased venous return and the Frank–Starling
mechanism, and through increased contractility from sympathetic stimulation,
plateauing at moderate intensity in most people,
so that further increases in output at high intensity come from heart rate.
Venous return is augmented by the muscle pump,
the squeezing of veins by contracting muscle, by the respiratory pump,
and by venoconstriction.
Arterial pressure rises modestly — systolic more than diastolic — because although
systemic vascular resistance falls with muscle vasodilatation,
the large rise in output more than compensates.
So the cardiac output response is driven by a linear rise in heart rate to its
ceiling and an earlier plateau in stroke volume,
supported by enhanced venous return,
delivering the greatly increased flow that exercise demands.
How is blood flow distributed and regulated during exercise?
During exercise blood flow is dramatically redistributed towards the working muscle
while being maintained to the vital organs and increased to the skin for heat loss,
and the key mechanism is local metabolic control.
In active skeletal muscle, the accumulation of metabolic products — a fall in
oxygen and pH, and a rise in carbon dioxide, potassium,
adenosine and other metabolites — causes powerful local arteriolar vasodilatation,
so that muscle blood flow can rise more than twentyfold and the muscle takes a far
larger share of the cardiac output,
perhaps eighty per cent at maximal exercise against twenty at rest.
This local metabolic vasodilatation overrides sympathetic vasoconstrictor tone in
the active muscle, a phenomenon termed functional sympatholysis,
ensuring flow goes where it is needed.
Simultaneously, sympathetic vasoconstriction reduces flow to non-essential beds —
the splanchnic and renal circulations — diverting their share to muscle,
while coronary flow rises to match the heart's increased work and cerebral flow is
preserved by autoregulation.
Skin flow rises to dissipate the heat of metabolism,
though at very high intensity it may be sacrificed to muscle.
So flow distribution in exercise is the result of intense local metabolic
vasodilatation in active muscle, overriding sympathetic tone there,
combined with sympathetic vasoconstriction of inactive beds — a redistribution that
channels the raised output to where oxygen is consumed.
Explain oxygen extraction and the arteriovenous oxygen difference in exercise.
The second term of the Fick equation, oxygen extraction,
also increases markedly in exercise and complements the rise in cardiac output.
At rest, the tissues extract only about a quarter of the oxygen delivered,
so mixed venous blood remains around seventy-five per cent saturated and the
arteriovenous oxygen content difference is about five millilitres per decilitre.
During exercise the active muscle extracts far more oxygen, for several reasons:
the increased metabolic rate consumes oxygen rapidly,
lowering tissue and capillary oxygen tension and steepening the diffusion gradient;
the local conditions in working muscle — higher carbon dioxide, lower pH,
higher temperature and raised two-three-DPG — shift the oxygen dissociation curve
to the right, the Bohr effect, releasing oxygen more readily;
and capillary recruitment increases the surface area and reduces diffusion distance.
As a result the arteriovenous oxygen difference can treble,
to fifteen millilitres per decilitre or more,
with mixed venous saturation falling steeply.
So in maximal exercise both terms of the Fick equation are maximised — cardiac
output rising several-fold and extraction trebling — and their product is the
many-fold rise in oxygen consumption;
the widened arteriovenous difference reflects the muscle stripping oxygen from the
blood far more completely than at rest, aided by the rightward Bohr shift.
What is the ventilatory response to exercise?
Ventilation increases greatly during exercise to deliver oxygen and, especially,
to eliminate the extra carbon dioxide produced,
and it does so in a characteristic pattern.
Minute ventilation rises in proportion to work,
achieved first by increasing tidal volume and then, at higher intensities,
by increasing respiratory rate, and it can rise from around six litres per minute
at rest to well over a hundred.
The response has phases: an immediate,
almost instantaneous increase at the very onset of exercise,
too fast to be chemically mediated and attributed to neural mechanisms — central
command from the motor cortex and afferents from the moving limbs;
then a slower rise over the next minutes to a steady state where ventilation
matches the metabolic rate; and a corresponding off-response at the end.
Through moderate exercise, ventilation rises in linear proportion to carbon dioxide
production and oxygen uptake, so arterial carbon dioxide and pH are held remarkably
constant — this is isocapnic buffering.
Above the anaerobic threshold, however,
lactic acid accumulates and is buffered by bicarbonate,
generating additional carbon dioxide that drives a disproportionate further rise in
ventilation.
So the ventilatory response combines a fast neural component at onset with a slower
metabolic matching, keeping carbon dioxide constant until the anaerobic threshold,
beyond which the extra carbon dioxide from buffering lactate drives ventilation up
steeply.
Define the anaerobic threshold and explain its significance.
The anaerobic threshold, also called the lactate threshold or the ventilatory
threshold, is the level of exercise intensity, or oxygen uptake,
above which energy production can no longer be met fully by aerobic metabolism and
anaerobic glycolysis begins to contribute significantly,
so that blood lactate starts to rise above its resting level.
Below the threshold, the oxygen supplied to muscle meets its needs and lactate is
cleared as fast as it is produced; above it,
the shortfall in aerobic capacity means lactate accumulates.
This matters physiologically because the lactic acid produced is buffered by
bicarbonate, generating extra carbon dioxide that causes the disproportionate rise
in ventilation already described — which is how the threshold can be detected
non-invasively, as the point where ventilation and carbon dioxide output rise out
of proportion to oxygen uptake.
Its significance is twofold. As a measure of fitness,
a higher anaerobic threshold indicates better aerobic conditioning,
and training raises it.
Clinically, in cardiopulmonary exercise testing, the anaerobic threshold is a key,
effort-independent measure of the integrated capacity of the heart,
lungs and circulation to deliver and use oxygen,
and a low threshold predicts poor tolerance of the increased oxygen demands of
major surgery.
So the anaerobic threshold marks the onset of significant anaerobic metabolism and
lactate accumulation, reflects aerobic fitness, and is a clinically valuable,
effort-independent index of cardiorespiratory reserve.
Tell me about the oxygen deficit and the oxygen debt,
or excess post-exercise oxygen consumption.
At the start of exercise, oxygen consumption cannot rise instantaneously to the
level the work demands, because the cardiovascular and metabolic adjustments take
time; during this lag the muscle makes up the shortfall by anaerobic means — using
stored ATP and creatine phosphate, and anaerobic glycolysis producing lactate.
The cumulative shortfall between the oxygen required and the oxygen actually
consumed in this period is the oxygen deficit.
After exercise ends, oxygen consumption does not return immediately to the resting
level but remains elevated for a time — the excess post-exercise oxygen
consumption, traditionally called the oxygen debt.
This elevated consumption pays back the deficit and meets the costs of recovery:
replenishing the stores of ATP and creatine phosphate,
re-saturating myoglobin and haemoglobin,
metabolising the accumulated lactate — much of it converted back to glucose in the
liver by the Cori cycle or oxidised — and meeting the raised metabolic rate from
elevated temperature, catecholamines and the continuing higher cardiac and
respiratory work.
The debt repaid generally exceeds the deficit incurred.
So the oxygen deficit is the anaerobic borrowing at the start of exercise,
and the oxygen debt, or excess post-exercise consumption,
is the elevated oxygen use afterwards that restores the energy stores,
clears lactate and returns the body to its resting state.
How is cardiopulmonary exercise testing used in perioperative assessment?
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing is the objective,
integrated assessment of the patient's ability to deliver and use oxygen under
controlled, increasing workload, and it has become a valuable tool in predicting
perioperative risk before major surgery.
The patient exercises, usually on a cycle ergometer,
against a rising workload while expired gases, ventilation,
the electrocardiogram and oxygen saturation are continuously measured,
allowing oxygen uptake and carbon dioxide output to be plotted against work.
The key derived variables are the maximal oxygen uptake, or its peak achieved,
and especially the anaerobic threshold,
which is effort-independent and so not invalidated if the patient stops early;
the ventilatory equivalents for carbon dioxide, reflecting ventilatory efficiency,
are also informative.
The rationale is that major surgery imposes a sustained increase in oxygen demand
in the postoperative period, akin to prolonged exercise,
and patients who cannot raise their oxygen delivery — those with a low anaerobic
threshold or peak oxygen uptake — tolerate this poorly and suffer more
complications and higher mortality.
The test therefore informs risk stratification,
the choice of surgery and of postoperative care level, shared decision-making,
and the identification of patients who might benefit from prehabilitation or
further cardiac investigation.
So cardiopulmonary exercise testing objectively measures integrated
cardiorespiratory reserve, and a low anaerobic threshold or peak oxygen uptake
flags the patient at high risk from the metabolic demands of major surgery.
Briefly, what are the chief adaptations to physical training?
Regular endurance training produces adaptations across several systems that
together raise maximal oxygen uptake and the anaerobic threshold and improve
efficiency.
Cardiovascular adaptations are central:
the heart undergoes physiological hypertrophy with an enlarged,
more compliant left ventricle, increasing the maximal stroke volume and hence the
maximal cardiac output and VO2max; resting and submaximal heart rates fall — a
training bradycardia — through increased vagal tone and the larger stroke volume,
and plasma volume expands.
In the muscle, capillary density increases,
improving oxygen delivery and extraction;
mitochondrial number and oxidative enzyme content rise,
raising the capacity for aerobic metabolism and shifting fuel use towards fat,
sparing glycogen and raising the lactate threshold.
Respiratory muscle endurance improves. Resistance training, by contrast,
increases muscle fibre size and strength with less effect on aerobic capacity.
These adaptations are specific to the type of training and reverse with detraining.
Their relevance to anaesthesia is that fitness,
reflected in these adaptations and measurable as a high anaerobic threshold,
confers greater reserve to withstand the demands of surgery,
which is the rationale for prehabilitation.
So training enlarges the heart and expands plasma volume to raise maximal output,
and remodels muscle to extract and use oxygen better,
raising VO2max and the anaerobic threshold and improving physiological reserve.
Now altitude. What is the fundamental physiological challenge of high altitude?
The fundamental challenge of high altitude is hypoxia — specifically a fall in the
partial pressure of inspired oxygen — caused by the fall in barometric pressure
with height.
The fractional concentration of oxygen in air remains constant at about twenty-one
per cent at all altitudes; what changes is the total atmospheric pressure,
which falls progressively with height,
roughly halving every five and a half kilometres.
Since the partial pressure of oxygen is that fraction of the total pressure,
less the water vapour pressure in the airways,
the inspired oxygen partial pressure falls in step with barometric pressure:
at sea level the inspired oxygen tension is around twenty kilopascals,
but on the summit of Everest, at about a third of sea-level pressure,
it is only a few kilopascals, barely compatible with life.
This hypobaric hypoxia reduces the alveolar and then the arterial oxygen tension,
and because the resting arterial point sits near the shoulder of the oxygen
dissociation curve, modest altitude has little effect on saturation,
but beyond a few thousand metres the point moves onto the steep part of the curve
and saturation falls steeply.
The body must then defend oxygen delivery by acclimatisation,
or suffer the illnesses of altitude.
So the single root cause is the fall in barometric pressure reducing inspired
oxygen partial pressure, producing hypobaric hypoxia,
against which all the responses to altitude are directed.
Describe the immediate ventilatory response to altitude and its consequences.
The immediate and most important response to the hypoxia of altitude is an increase
in ventilation, the hypoxic ventilatory response,
mediated by the peripheral chemoreceptors of the carotid bodies,
which sense the fall in arterial oxygen tension and stimulate breathing.
This hyperventilation raises alveolar and arterial oxygen partial pressure towards
normal, partly defending oxygenation, and is the cornerstone of the acute response.
However, it has an immediate consequence:
increased ventilation blows off carbon dioxide,
lowering arterial carbon dioxide and producing a respiratory alkalosis.
This alkalosis is itself a brake on ventilation,
because the central chemoreceptors,
sensing the reduced carbon dioxide and the alkaline cerebrospinal fluid,
oppose the hypoxic drive, so that the initial hyperventilation is blunted and
submaximal.
Over the following days, the kidney compensates for the respiratory alkalosis by
excreting bicarbonate, allowing the pH to return towards normal and removing the
brake, so ventilation can rise further — part of acclimatisation.
The leftward shift of the oxygen dissociation curve from the alkalosis acutely aids
oxygen loading in the lung.
So the acute response is a carotid-body-driven hyperventilation that defends
oxygenation but causes a respiratory alkalosis,
which both limits the response initially and triggers the renal compensation that
permits fuller acclimatisation.
What is acute mountain sickness?
Acute mountain sickness is the common,
usually self-limiting illness that affects unacclimatised people who ascend rapidly
to altitudes above about two and a half to three thousand metres.
It is a clinical syndrome of headache accompanied by some combination of nausea,
anorexia, fatigue, dizziness and disturbed sleep,
developing within hours of arrival at altitude.
Its underlying cause is thought to relate to the hypoxia and to mild cerebral
swelling — increased cerebral blood flow and fluid shifts producing a degree of
cerebral oedema and raised intracranial pressure — together with the effects of the
hypoxia itself, and individual susceptibility varies widely.
The principal risk factor is the rate of ascent and the absolute altitude reached,
especially the sleeping altitude, while slow,
graded ascent allowing acclimatisation is protective.
Most cases are mild and resolve with rest, avoidance of further ascent,
and simple analgesia; acetazolamide, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor,
both prevents and treats it by inducing a metabolic acidosis that stimulates
ventilation, in effect accelerating acclimatisation, and dexamethasone is also used.
The crucial point is that acute mountain sickness can be the precursor to the
life-threatening forms, high-altitude cerebral and pulmonary oedema,
so worsening symptoms mandate descent.
So acute mountain sickness is a self-limiting hypoxic syndrome of rapid ascent,
prevented by graded ascent and acetazolamide,
but important as the harbinger of the dangerous high-altitude oedemas.
Describe the two life-threatening forms — high-altitude pulmonary and cerebral
oedema.
High-altitude pulmonary oedema and high-altitude cerebral oedema are the severe,
potentially fatal illnesses of altitude, and both demand immediate descent.
High-altitude pulmonary oedema is a non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema occurring
typically two to four days after ascent.
Its mechanism is exaggerated and uneven hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction:
the hypoxia causes pulmonary arterial vasoconstriction, but unevenly,
so that the patent vessels are exposed to high pressure and flow,
damaging the capillaries and causing a high-permeability leak of protein-rich fluid
into the alveoli.
It presents with breathlessness, cough,
reduced exercise tolerance and then frank pulmonary oedema with hypoxaemia,
and is treated by descent, oxygen, and pulmonary vasodilators such as nifedipine,
with measures to reduce pulmonary pressure.
High-altitude cerebral oedema is thought to be the severe end of the spectrum that
begins with acute mountain sickness: progressive cerebral oedema,
vasogenic and cytotoxic, raising intracranial pressure and producing ataxia,
confusion, drowsiness and ultimately coma.
It is treated with descent, oxygen and dexamethasone,
with hyperbaric therapy if descent is impossible.
Both are emergencies in which the single most effective intervention is to lose
altitude.
So high-altitude pulmonary oedema is a leak from uneven hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction, cerebral oedema is severe hypoxic brain swelling,
and the over-riding treatment of both is immediate descent with oxygen and the
relevant drug.
Outline the process of acclimatisation to altitude.
Acclimatisation is the set of adaptive changes by which a person who remains at
altitude progressively improves their tolerance of hypoxia over days to weeks,
and it occurs in stages affecting several systems.
The first and most important is the ventilatory adaptation already described:
the acute hypoxic hyperventilation is limited by the resulting respiratory
alkalosis, but over two to four days the kidney excretes bicarbonate,
the cerebrospinal fluid and arterial pH return towards normal,
and the brake on ventilation is released,
so ventilation rises further and arterial oxygen improves.
Second is a haematological adaptation:
the hypoxia stimulates the kidney to release erythropoietin within hours,
and over days to weeks red cell production increases,
raising the haemoglobin concentration and the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood
— a true polycythaemia, distinct from the early haemoconcentration from a fall in
plasma volume.
Third, at the tissue level, there is a rightward shift of the oxygen dissociation
curve from increased two-three-DPG, aiding oxygen unloading,
and over longer periods increases in capillary density and mitochondrial content.
Cardiovascular adjustments include an initial tachycardia that settles.
Acclimatisation is gradual and incomplete at extreme altitude,
and it is lost on return to sea level.
So acclimatisation combines a renal-enabled rise in ventilation,
an erythropoietin-driven polycythaemia,
and tissue-level changes including a rightward curve shift,
together improving oxygen delivery over days to weeks.
Say more about the haematological and oxygen-curve changes in acclimatisation.
The blood adapts to altitude in two complementary ways — by carrying more oxygen
and by releasing it more readily — though each has limits.
The increase in oxygen-carrying capacity comes from polycythaemia:
sustained hypoxia, sensed by the renal interstitial cells,
drives erythropoietin secretion, which stimulates the marrow to produce more red
cells, so that over weeks the haemoglobin concentration and haematocrit rise
substantially, increasing the amount of oxygen each volume of blood can carry.
This is highly adaptive up to a point,
but excessive polycythaemia raises blood viscosity,
increasing the work of the heart and the risk of thrombosis,
and contributes to chronic mountain sickness.
The change in oxygen release is the rightward shift of the oxygen dissociation
curve, produced by an increase in red-cell two-three-DPG that develops over a day
or two; the rightward shift lowers haemoglobin's affinity for oxygen,
which favours unloading to the tissues at the capillary level.
There is a trade-off, because a rightward shift slightly hinders loading in the
lung; at extreme altitude the alkalosis-induced leftward shift,
favouring pulmonary loading, may become more advantageous,
and the net position is a balance.
So acclimatisation raises oxygen-carrying capacity through erythropoietin-driven
polycythaemia and improves tissue unloading through a two-three-DPG-mediated
rightward curve shift, both with limits and trade-offs that matter at extreme
altitude.
What cardiovascular and pulmonary vascular changes occur at altitude?
Altitude affects the systemic and, particularly, the pulmonary circulation.
Systemically, the acute response to hypoxia includes sympathetic activation with an
increase in heart rate and a modest rise in cardiac output,
helping to maintain oxygen delivery despite the lower arterial content;
blood pressure may rise a little.
Over time, as acclimatisation proceeds and polycythaemia raises oxygen content,
the resting heart rate settles, though the maximal heart rate and maximal cardiac
output, and hence maximal exercise capacity, remain reduced at altitude.
The most important and characteristic change is in the pulmonary circulation:
alveolar hypoxia causes hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction throughout the lung,
a response that at sea level usefully diverts blood from poorly ventilated areas,
but which at altitude, where the whole lung is hypoxic,
raises pulmonary vascular resistance globally and produces pulmonary hypertension.
This increases the work of the right ventricle,
and sustained exposure can lead to right ventricular hypertrophy.
The uneven form of this vasoconstriction underlies high-altitude pulmonary oedema,
and its global form underlies the pulmonary hypertension of chronic residence.
So altitude raises heart rate and output acutely while capping maximal output,
and its hallmark vascular change is global hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction
causing pulmonary hypertension and right heart strain.
What happens with chronic residence at high altitude,
including chronic mountain sickness?
Populations who live permanently at high altitude show long-term adaptation,
and some develop the maladaptive syndrome of chronic mountain sickness.
Long-term high-altitude residents and, still more,
populations with generations of altitude ancestry,
show adaptations that may include an enhanced ventilatory drive or,
in some highland peoples, distinctive patterns such as higher resting ventilation,
increased lung volumes and efficient oxygenation without excessive polycythaemia —
the Tibetan pattern — while others, such as Andean highlanders,
tolerate higher haemoglobins.
Sustained pulmonary hypertension with right ventricular hypertrophy is common.
Chronic mountain sickness, or Monge's disease,
is a maladaptation occurring in some long-term residents,
particularly of the Andes: an excessive polycythaemic response to the chronic
hypoxia produces a very high haemoglobin and haematocrit, raising blood viscosity,
with symptoms of headache, fatigue, cyanosis,
breathlessness and impaired cognition, and a risk of thrombosis and heart failure;
it improves on descent or with venesection.
So chronic residence brings genuine adaptation that differs between populations,
but also the risk, in susceptible individuals,
of chronic mountain sickness from an excessive,
viscosity-raising polycythaemia — illustrating that the adaptive responses to
altitude carry their own ceiling and hazards.
How are these principles relevant to aviation and cabin pressurisation?
The same physiology governs aviation,
where the solution to the hypobaric hypoxia of altitude is cabin pressurisation.
Commercial aircraft cruise at altitudes where the ambient pressure would cause
severe hypoxia and loss of consciousness within minutes,
so the cabin is pressurised — not to sea level,
which would over-stress the airframe,
but to a cabin altitude equivalent of up to around two and a half thousand metres,
at which a healthy person's arterial oxygen tension falls modestly but tolerably.
For the healthy traveller this is benign,
but for patients with limited respiratory or cardiac reserve the further fall in
inspired oxygen may be significant,
which is the basis of pre-flight assessment and the hypoxic challenge test,
and of in-flight supplemental oxygen for those at risk.
Two further gas-related points matter:
trapped gas expands as ambient pressure falls — relevant to a pneumothorax,
recent intra-ocular gas, bowel surgery or air in body cavities,
which may expand dangerously, so flying is contraindicated for a period after such
events; and a person who has recently been diving carries dissolved nitrogen that
can come out of solution as the cabin pressure falls,
causing decompression illness, so a delay before flying is advised.
So aviation manages altitude hypoxia by partial cabin pressurisation,
which is safe for the healthy but a genuine hypoxic stress for the patient with
poor reserve, and the expansion of trapped gas and the risk after diving add
further flight cautions.
Finally, draw exercise and altitude together for their relevance to anaesthesia.
Drawing the station together, exercise and altitude are two physiological stresses
that illuminate the body's capacity to match oxygen delivery to demand,
and both have direct anaesthetic relevance.
Exercise physiology underlies our objective assessment of fitness for surgery:
the integrated rise in cardiac output and oxygen extraction,
framed by the Fick principle, and the anaerobic threshold are the very measures
that cardiopulmonary exercise testing uses to predict who will withstand the
prolonged increase in oxygen demand that major surgery imposes,
and the adaptations to training are the rationale for prehabilitation to build
reserve.
Altitude physiology is, in essence,
the study of how the body defends itself against hypoxia,
and it teaches the responses — chemoreceptor-driven ventilation,
the oxygen dissociation curve and its shifts, hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction,
and the erythropoietic response — that recur throughout our management of the
hypoxaemic patient; it also bears practically on the fitness of patients to fly,
on those who live or travel at altitude,
and on the principles behind oxygen therapy and the assessment of respiratory
reserve.
Both topics reinforce the central anaesthetic preoccupation:
the adequacy of oxygen delivery to the tissues,
the reserve available to increase it under stress,
and the consequences when that reserve is exceeded.
So exercise and altitude together are extended lessons in oxygen delivery,
extraction and reserve, the quantities on which every anaesthetic ultimately
depends.
How is body temperature and fluid balance managed during exercise?
Exercise generates large amounts of heat as a by-product of muscular metabolism —
only about a quarter of the energy is converted to mechanical work,
the rest appearing as heat — so heat dissipation becomes a major demand,
and its management competes with the circulatory demands of the exercise itself.
The principal route of heat loss in exercise is evaporative: sweating,
driven by sympathetic cholinergic fibres, can exceed a litre an hour in a fit,
acclimatised person, and its evaporation removes the latent heat.
Cutaneous vasodilatation brings warm blood to the surface to lose heat by radiation
and convection, but this diverts cardiac output to the skin,
competing with muscle blood flow, so that in the heat the cardiovascular strain of
exercise is greater and performance falls.
Sweating incurs a substantial loss of water and electrolytes; if not replaced,
the resulting dehydration reduces plasma volume, raises heart rate,
reduces stroke volume and sweat rate, and predisposes to heat exhaustion and,
if thermoregulation fails, to life-threatening heat stroke with central nervous
system disturbance.
Fluid and electrolyte replacement during prolonged exercise therefore sustains both
thermoregulation and circulation, though excessive intake of plain water risks
hyponatraemia. Acclimatisation to heat increases the sweat rate,
lowers its salt content, and expands plasma volume.
So exercise demands vigorous evaporative and vasodilatory heat loss that competes
with muscle perfusion, and maintaining fluid and electrolyte balance is essential
to sustain both temperature regulation and cardiovascular function.
What fuels are used during exercise,
and how does this change with intensity and duration?
The fuel for exercise is drawn from carbohydrate and fat,
and the mix shifts predictably with the intensity and the duration of effort.
At rest and during low-intensity exercise,
fat — free fatty acids from adipose tissue and intramuscular triglyceride —
supplies most of the energy, oxidised aerobically,
which is efficient and draws on large stores.
As intensity rises, the contribution of carbohydrate — muscle glycogen and blood
glucose — increases progressively, because carbohydrate yields more energy per
litre of oxygen and can be metabolised faster, including anaerobically;
the point at which carbohydrate overtakes fat as the dominant fuel is termed the
crossover.
At high intensities, above the anaerobic threshold,
carbohydrate dominates and anaerobic glycolysis contributes, generating lactate.
Over prolonged exercise, glycogen stores, which are limited,
become progressively depleted, and the body relies increasingly on fat oxidation
and on hepatic glucose output from glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis to maintain
blood glucose; glycogen depletion is a major cause of fatigue in endurance events,
the phenomenon athletes call hitting the wall.
Training shifts metabolism towards greater fat use at a given workload,
sparing glycogen and raising endurance.
So exercise fuel shifts from fat at low intensity towards carbohydrate as intensity
rises, glycogen depletes over prolonged effort shifting reliance back to fat and
hepatic glucose, and training enhances fat use to spare the limited glycogen stores.
Contrast altitude with the physiology of diving and the hyperbaric environment.
Diving and the hyperbaric environment present the mirror image of altitude:
instead of falling ambient pressure and hypoxia,
the diver faces rising ambient pressure,
which increases the partial pressures of the gases breathed and governs their
behaviour by the gas laws.
As a diver descends, pressure rises by about one atmosphere for every ten metres of
seawater, and by Boyle's law gas-filled spaces are compressed — relevant to the
lungs, middle ear and sinuses, which must be equalised,
and dangerously to any breath-hold ascent, where expanding gas can rupture the lung.
The raised partial pressures of the breathed gases have specific effects.
Nitrogen at depth becomes narcotic — nitrogen narcosis,
the rapture of the deep — impairing judgement,
and it dissolves in the tissues in increased amounts according to Henry's law;
if the diver then ascends too quickly,
this dissolved nitrogen comes out of solution as bubbles,
causing decompression sickness, the bends, with joint pain,
neurological injury and, from pulmonary bubbles,
the chokes — hence the need for controlled, staged ascent.
Oxygen, beneficial as therapy, becomes toxic at high partial pressure,
causing central nervous system convulsions and, with prolonged exposure,
pulmonary injury, which limits its use at depth and in hyperbaric therapy.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy exploits high-pressure oxygen to treat decompression
sickness, carbon monoxide poisoning and certain wounds.
So the hyperbaric environment inverts altitude:
rising pressure compresses gas spaces and raises gas partial pressures,
producing nitrogen narcosis, decompression sickness on ascent and oxygen toxicity,
all explained by the gas laws.
What is the place of acetazolamide and other drugs in altitude illness?
Pharmacological measures supplement the cornerstone of graded ascent in preventing
and treating altitude illness, and acetazolamide is the principal agent.
Acetazolamide is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor:
by inhibiting the enzyme in the renal tubule it promotes the excretion of
bicarbonate, producing a mild metabolic acidosis.
This acidosis stimulates ventilation through the chemoreceptors,
in effect mimicking and accelerating the renal compensation that normally takes
days during acclimatisation, so it both speeds acclimatisation and counteracts the
respiratory alkalosis that would otherwise limit the hypoxic ventilatory response;
it also reduces the periodic breathing of sleep at altitude and improves nocturnal
oxygenation.
It is used for the prevention of acute mountain sickness,
particularly with unavoidable rapid ascent, and as an adjunct in treatment.
Its side effects include a diuresis,
paraesthesiae and an altered taste of carbonated drinks, and it is a sulphonamide.
Dexamethasone is used to prevent and treat acute mountain sickness and is a key
treatment for high-altitude cerebral oedema, reducing cerebral oedema,
though unlike acetazolamide it does not aid acclimatisation.
For high-altitude pulmonary oedema, pulmonary vasodilators — nifedipine,
and agents such as the phosphodiesterase-five inhibitors — reduce pulmonary artery
pressure. Supplemental oxygen and descent remain definitive.
So acetazolamide prevents and treats altitude illness by inducing an acidosis that
drives ventilation and accelerates acclimatisation,
dexamethasone treats cerebral oedema,
and pulmonary vasodilators address pulmonary oedema — all adjuncts to graded
ascent, oxygen and descent.
Explain hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in more detail and its relevance to
anaesthesia.
Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is the intrinsic response of the pulmonary
circulation by which alveolar hypoxia causes constriction of the local pulmonary
arterioles, and it is a recurring theme linking altitude physiology to everyday
anaesthetic practice.
Its mechanism is local: low alveolar oxygen tension,
sensed by the pulmonary arterial smooth muscle through effects on mitochondrial
signalling and ion channels, causes those vessels to constrict,
in contrast to the systemic circulation where hypoxia causes vasodilatation.
Its physiological purpose is to optimise the matching of ventilation to perfusion:
when a region of lung is poorly ventilated and therefore hypoxic,
constricting its vessels diverts blood away towards better-ventilated regions,
reducing shunt and improving oxygenation.
This is beneficial when the hypoxia is regional.
When the whole lung is hypoxic, as at altitude,
the response becomes global and maladaptive,
raising pulmonary vascular resistance and causing pulmonary hypertension and,
unevenly, high-altitude pulmonary oedema.
Its anaesthetic relevance is considerable:
during one-lung ventilation for thoracic surgery,
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in the non-ventilated,
collapsed lung diverts blood to the ventilated lung and limits the shunt,
so preserving oxygenation; and many anaesthetic agents,
particularly the volatile agents in higher concentrations and various vasodilators,
inhibit the response and can worsen oxygenation during one-lung ventilation.
So hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction matches perfusion to ventilation,
underlies the pulmonary hypertension of altitude,
and is directly exploited and potentially impaired during one-lung anaesthesia.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Oxygen uptake in exercise is framed by the Fick principle — cardiac output
times the arteriovenous oxygen difference — with VO2max set largely by maximal
oxygen delivery; both output and extraction rise several-fold.
Second, The anaerobic threshold marks the onset of significant lactate accumulation
and is an effort-independent index of cardiorespiratory reserve;
cardiopulmonary exercise testing uses it to predict tolerance of major surgery. 3.
Flow is redistributed to working muscle by local metabolic vasodilatation
overriding sympathetic tone, while inactive beds vasoconstrict;
training enlarges the heart, expands plasma volume and remodels muscle to raise
VO2max.
Third, Altitude causes hypobaric hypoxia from falling barometric pressure;
the acute response is carotid-body hyperventilation,
which causes a respiratory alkalosis that is renally compensated to allow fuller
acclimatisation.
Fourth, Acclimatisation combines rising ventilation,
erythropoietin-driven polycythaemia and a 2,3-DPG rightward curve shift;
rapid ascent risks acute mountain sickness and the fatal high-altitude pulmonary
and cerebral oedemas, whose treatment is descent — principles that also govern
cabin pressurisation and fitness to fly.
Thank you. That concludes the station.